# Introduction
Cancer is a causality process. Specifically, given a patient $\rho$ with the genetic dataset $\mathbb{G} = \{G_1,\dots, G_n \}$, the mutation in a single biomarker could be caused by the activation of some other biomarkers, which can be presented as a causality model. In this paper, the \textbf{biomarker} is defined as: \textit{"A substance in the blood, bodily fluids, or tissues indicating a typical or atypical physiological process, state, or state ailment.\cite{nci-biomarker}"}. We present the event $E_i$ that a gene $G_i$ witnesses a mutational event. Of note, mutations happen constantly\cite{lewontin1985population}; hence, biomarkers attributed to a single \textbf{target} could vary. However, the underlying relationship among genes (still obscure up to this point) could leave the trait of evidence, with can be presented statistically. We define \textbf{targets} as biomarkers with empirical evidence that certainly leads to carcinogenesis. We will use the \textit{RAS}-family (a group of \textit{oncogenes}) for demonstrating the proposed algorithm. 

We denote target as $\bm{Y}$, in which $\mathbb{P}(\bm{Y} = 0) = p$ and $\mathbb{P}(\bm{Y} = 1) = 1-p$; where $\{\bm{Y} = 1\}$ is the event that the target got mutational activation; otherwise the biomarker-target stay wild-type. We use the term biomarker-target because a target can be a biomarker of other targets.

We define the \textbf{biomarker set} that activates the mutation on the target $\bm{Y}$ as $\mathcal{G} = \{G_i,G_j, \dots,G_k\}$; $i,j,k \in \text{Index}$ set of the mother set $\mathbb{G}$. The complexity of finding this subset \textbf{structure} is challenging. Specifically, there are $k \choose n$ number of such subsets. Here, we highlight that each person will have characterized patterns for mutational alterations, which induce idiosyncratic biomarker sets. For all possibilities, we have the summation combination of
\begin{equation}
    \sum_{i=0}^{N}{N\choose k} = 2^N
\end{equation}
possibilities. Human genomes have approximately $N=20,000$ to $25,000$ genes which induce a massive search space of $3.2019 \times 10^{6577}$ candidate biomarker sets for an \textbf{biomarker identification algorithm}, exponentially scaled with the number of input genes. Here, we would like to define the idiosyncratic-biomarker set of a given cohort as the \textbf{biomarker-verse}, as the number of possibilities is much larger than the number of atoms in one universe\cite{nielsen2002quantum} ($2^{300}$-$2^{500}$).

This article introduces Quant\textit{Ants} machine, a quantum algorithm for the discovery of a biomarker-verse associated with a given dataset $\mathcal{D} = \{\bm{X},\bm{Y} \}$, in which $\bm{X}$ is the \textbf{feature set}; or \textbf{genetic representations} like DNA Methylation, RNA/miRNA expression, protein expressions. In other words, the outcome of our model is data-driven, which can be implemented in the next generation of quantum computers. Here, we will only introduce the quantum algorithm from the fundamentals of mathematical oncology. We organize the article as follows: \textbf{Section}~\ref{sec:method} introduces the algorithm, Quant\textit{Ants} machine for the identification of data-driven biomarker-verse. \textbf{Section}~\ref{sec:result} reports the numerical results using three case studies associated with the running exemplary of the discussed targets. We will give several future directions to this work in \textbf{Section}~\ref{sec:conclusion} with clinical significance discussed in \textbf{Section}~\ref{sec:clinical_significance}.
